---
title: "Examination of factors determining fault in two-vehicle motorcycle crashes"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2012-06-10-fault
excerpt: 'Statistical model of motorcycle crashes'
date: 2012-06-10
venue: 'Accident Analysis and Prevention'
paperurl: 'https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0001457511002740'
citation: 'William H Schneider IV, Peter T Savolainen, D. Van Boxel, Rick Beverley (2012). &quot;Examination of factors determining fault in two-vehicle motorcycle crashes&quot; <i>Accident Analysis & Prevention, 45, 669-676.
---

Abstract: Motorcycle crashes frequently involve a combination of high-risk behaviors by the motorcyclist or the other crash-involved driver. Such behaviors may include riding or driving without appropriate licensure or while under the influence of alcohol, as well as deciding not to use a safety device such as a helmet or safety belt. Given that these factors frequently occur in combination with one another, it is difficult to untangle the specific effects of individual factors leading up to the crash outcome. This study assesses how various rider-, driver-, and other crash-specific factors contribute to at-fault status in two-vehicle motorcycle crashes, as well as how these same factors affect the propensity for other high-risk behaviors. Furthermore, the interrelationships among fault status and these other behaviors are also examined using a multivariate probit model. This model is developed using police-reported crash data for the years 2006–2010 from the State of Ohio. The results show that younger motorcyclists are more likely to be at-fault in the event of a collision, as are riders who are under the influence of alcohol, riding without insurance, or not wearing a helmet. Similarly, motorcyclists were less likely to be at-fault when the other driver was of younger age or was driving under the influence of alcohol, without insurance, or not wearing their safety belt. Crash-involved parties who engaged in one high-risk behavior were more likely to engage in other such behaviors, as well, and this finding was consistent for both motorcyclists and drivers. The results of this study suggest that educational and enforcement strategies aimed at addressing any one of these behaviors are likely to have tangential impacts on the other behaviors, as well.
